---
authors:
- joemoe: null
  name: Joe Moser
  twitter: JoemoeAT
- name: Yun Gao
  twitter: YunGao16
  yungao: null
date: "2022-05-05T08:00:00Z"
subtitle: ""
title: Announcing the Release of Apache Flink 1.15
---

Thanks to our well-organized and open community, Apache Flink continues 
[to grow](https://www.apache.org/foundation/docs/FY2021AnnualReport.pdf) as a 
technology and remain one of the most active projects in
the Apache community. With the release of Flink 1.15, we are proud to announce a number of 
exciting changes.

One of the main concepts that makes Apache Flink stand out is the unification of 
batch (aka bounded) and stream (aka unbounded) data processing, which helps reduce the complexity of development. A lot of 
effort went into this unification in the previous releases, and you can expect more efforts in this direction.

Apache Flink is not only growing when it comes to contributions and users, but
also out of the original use cases. We are seeing a trend towards more business/analytics 
use cases implemented in low-/no-code. Flink SQL is the feature in the Flink ecosystem 
that enables such uses cases and this is why its popularity continues to grow.  

Apache Flink is an essential building block in data pipelines/architectures and 
is used with many other technologies in order to drive all sorts of use cases. While new ideas/products
may appear in this domain, existing technologies continue to establish themselves as standards for solving 
mission-critical problems. Knowing that we have such a wide reach and play a role in the success of many 
projects, it is important that the experience of 
integrating Apache Flink with the cloud infrastructures and existing systems is as seamless and easy as possible.

In the 1.15 release the Apache Flink community made significant progress across all 
these areas. Still those are not the only things that made it into 1.15. The 
contributors improved the experience of operating Apache Flink by making it much 
easier and more transparent to handle checkpoints and savepoints and their ownership, 
making auto scaling more seamless and complete, by removing side effects of use cases 
in which different data sources produce varying amounts of data, and - finally - the 
ability to upgrade SQL jobs without losing the state. By continuing on supporting 
checkpoints after tasks finished and adding window table valued functions in batch 
mode, the experience of unified stream and batch processing was once more improved 
making hybrid use cases way easier. In the SQL space, not only the first step in 
version upgrades have been added but also JSON functions to make it easier to import 
and export structured data in SQL. Both will allow users to better rely on Flink SQL 
for production use cases in the long term. To establish Apache Flink as part of the 
data processing ecosystem we improved the cloud interoperability and added more sink 
connectors and formats. And yes we enabled a Scala-free runtime 
([the hype is real](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)).


## Operating Apache Flink with ease

Even Flink jobs that have been built and tuned by the best engineering teams still need to 
be operated, usually on a long-term basis. The many deployment 
patterns, APIs, tunable configs, and use cases covered by Apache Flink mean that operation
support is vital and can be burdensome.

In this release, we listened to user feedback and now operating Flink is made much 
easier. It is now more transparent in terms of handling checkpoints and savepoints and their ownership, 
which makes auto-scaling more seamless and complete (by removing side effects of use cases 
where different data sources produce varying amounts of data) and enables the  
ability to upgrade SQL jobs without losing the state. 


### Clarification of checkpoint and savepoint semantics

An essential cornerstone of Flink’s fault tolerance strategy is based on 
[checkpoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints/) and 
[savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/) (see [the comparison](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/checkpoints_vs_savepoints/)). 
The purpose of savepoints has always been to put transitions, 
backups, and upgrades of Flink jobs in the control of users. Checkpoints, on 
the other hand, are intended to be fully controlled by Flink and guarantee fault 
tolerance through fast recovery, failover, etc. Both concepts are quite similar, and
the underlying implementation also shares aspects of the same ideas. 

However, both concepts grew apart by following specific feature requests and sometimes 
neglecting the overarching idea and strategy. Based on user feedback, it became apparent that this should be 
aligned and harmonized better and, above all, to make more clear! 

There have been situations in which users relied on checkpoints to stop/restart jobs when savepoints would have 
been the right way to go. It was also not clear that savepoints are slower since they don’t include 
some of the features that make taking checkpoints so fast. In some cases like 
resuming from a retained checkpoint - where the checkpoint is somehow considered as 
a savepoint - it is unclear to the user when they can actually clean it up. 

With [FLIP-193 (Snapshots ownership)](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-193%3A+Snapshots+ownership) 
the community aims to make ownership the only difference between savepoints and 
checkpoints. In the 1.15 release the community has fixed some of those shortcomings 
by supporting 
[native and incremental savepoints](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#savepoint-format). 
Savepoints always used to use the 
canonical format which made them slower. Also writing full savepoints for sure takes 
longer than doing it in an incremental way. With 1.15 if users use the native format 
to take savepoints as well as the RocksDB state backend, savepoints will be 
automatically taken in an incremental manner. The documentation has also been 
clarified to provide a better overview and understanding of the differences between 
checkpoints and savepoints. The semantics for 
[resuming from savepoint/retained checkpoint](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/savepoints/#resuming-from-savepoints) 
have also been clarified introducing the CLAIM and NO_CLAIM mode. With 
the CLAIM mode Flink takes over ownership of an existing snapshot, with NO_CLAIM it 
creates its own copy and leaves the existing one up to the user. Please note that 
NO_CLAIM mode is the new default behavior. The old semantic of resuming from 
savepoint/retained checkpoint is still accessible but has to be manually selected by 
choosing LEGACY mode.


### Elastic scaling with reactive mode and the adaptive scheduler

Driven by the increasing number of cloud services built on top of Apache Flink, the 
project is becoming more and more cloud native which makes elastic 
scaling even more important. 

This release improves metrics for the [reactive mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#reactive-mode), which is a job-scope mode where the JobManager will try to use all TaskManager resources available. To do this, we made all the metrics in 
the Job scope work correctly when reactive mode is enabled. 

We also added an exception history for the [adaptive scheduler](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-160%3A+Adaptive+Scheduler), which is a new scheduler that first declares the required resources and waits for them before deciding on the parallelism with which to execute a job. 

Furthermore, downscaling is sped up significantly. The TaskManager now has a dedicated 
shutdown code path, where it actively deregisters itself from the cluster instead 
of relying on heartbeats, giving the JobManager a clear signal for downscaling.


### Adaptive batch scheduler

In 1.15, we introduced a new scheduler to Apache Flink: the 
[Adaptive Batch Scheduler](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/elastic_scaling/#adaptive-batch-scheduler). 
The new scheduler can automatically decide parallelisms of job vertices for batch jobs, 
according to the size of data volume each vertex needs to process.

Major benefits of this scheduler includes:

1. Ease-of-use: Batch job users can be relieved from parallelism tuning.
2. Adaptive: Automatically tuned parallelisms can better fit consumed datasets which 
   have a varying volume size every day.
3. Fine-grained: Parallelism of each job vertex will be tuned individually. This allows 
   vertices of SQL batch jobs to be automatically assigned different proper parallelisms.


### Watermark alignment across data sources

Having data sources that increase watermarks at different paces could lead to 
problems with downstream operators. For example, some operators might need to buffer excessive 
amounts of data which could lead to huge operator states. This is why we introduced watermark alignment
in this release.

For sources based on the new source interface, 
[watermark alignment](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/event-time/generating_watermarks/#watermark-alignment-_beta_)
can be activated. Users can define 
alignment groups to pause consuming from sources which are too far ahead from others. The ideal scenario for aligned watermarks is when there are two or more 
sources that produce watermarks at a different speed and when the source has the same 
parallelism as splits/shards/partitions.


### SQL version upgrades

The execution plan of SQL queries and its resulting topology is based on optimization 
rules and a cost model. This means that even minimal changes could introduce a completely 
different topology. This dynamism makes guaranteeing snapshot compatibility 
very challenging across different Flink versions. In the efforts of 1.15, the community focused 
on keeping the same query (via the same topology) up and running even after upgrades. 

At the core of SQL upgrades are JSON plans 
([please note that we only have documentation in our JavaDocs for now and are still working on updating the documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/api/java/org/apache/flink/table/api/CompiledPlan.html)), which are JSON functions that make it easier to import and export structured data in SQL. This has been introduced for 
internal use already in previous releases and will now be exposed externally. Both the Table API 
and SQL will provide a way to compile and execute a plan which guarantees the same 
topology throughout different versions. This feature will be released as an experimental MVP. 
Users who want to give it a try already can create a JSON plan that can then be used 
to restore a Flink job based on the old operator structure. The full feature can be expected 
in Flink 1.16.

Reliable upgrades makes Flink SQL more dependable for production use cases in the long term. 


### Changelog state backend

In Flink 1.15, we introduced the MVP feature of the
[changelog state backend](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#enabling-changelog), 
which aims at 
making checkpoint intervals shorter and more predictable with the following advantages:

1. Shorter end-to-end latency: end-to-end latency mostly depends on the checkpointing 
   mechanism, especially for transactional sinks. Transactional sinks commit on 
   checkpoints, so faster checkpoints mean more frequent commits.
2. More predictable checkpoint intervals: currently checkpointing time largely depends 
   on the size of the artifacts that need to be persisted on the checkpoint storage. 
   By keeping the size consistently small, checkpointing time becomes more predictable.
3. Less work on recovery: with more frequently checkpoints are taken, less data need 
   to be re-processed after each recovery.

The changelog state backend helps achieve the above by continuously 
persisting state changes on non-volatile storage while performing state materialization 
in the background.


### Repeatable cleanup

In previous releases of Flink, cleaning up job-related artifacts was done only once which might have resulted in abandoned artifacts in case of an error. In this version, Flink will try to run the cleanup again to avoid leaving artifacts behind. This retry mechanism runs until it was successful, by default. Users can change this behavior by configuring the [repeatable cleanup options](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#retryable-cleanup). Disabling the retry strategy will lead to Flink behaving like in previous releases.

There is still work in progress around cleaning up checkpoints, which is covered by 
[FLINK-26606](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-26606).


### OpenAPI

Flink is now providing an experimental REST API specification following the 
[OpenAPI](https://www.openapis.org) standard.
This allows the REST API to be used with standard tools that are implementing the
OpenAPI standard.
You can find the specification [here](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/ops/rest_api/#jobmanager).


### Improvements to application mode

When running Flink in [application mode](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.14/docs/deployment/overview/), it can now be guaranteed that jobs will take a savepoint after they are completed if they have been configured to do so
([see execution.shutdown-on-application-finish](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/deployment/config/#execution-shutdown-on-application-finish)). 

The recovery and clean up of jobs running in application mode has also been improved. The local 
state can be persisted in the working directory, which makes recovering 
from local storage easier.


## Unification of stream and batch processing - more progress

In the latest release, we picked up new efforts and continued some previous ones in the goal of unifying stream and batch processing.


### Final checkpoints

In Flink 1.14, final checkpoints were added as a feature that had to be enabled manually. 
Since the last release, we listened to user feedback and decided to enable it by default. For more 
information and how to disable this feature, please refer to the 
[documentation](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/datastream/fault-tolerance/checkpointing/#checkpointing-with-parts-of-the-graph-finished).
This change in configuration can prolong the shutting down sequence of bounded 
streaming jobs because jobs have to wait for a final checkpoint before being allowed to 
finish.


### Window table-valued functions

[Window table-valued functions](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/sql/queries/window-tvf/) 
have only been available for unbounded data streams. 
With this release they will also be usable in BATCH mode. While working on this, 
change window table-valued functions have also been improved in general by implementing 
a dedicated operator which no longer requires those window functions to be used with 
aggregators.


## Flink SQL

Community metrics indicate that Flink SQL is widely used and becomes more popular every day. The community made several improvements but we’d like to go into two in more detail.


### CAST/Type system enhancements

Data appears in all sorts and shapes but is often not in the type that you need 
it to be, which is why 
[casting](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/types/#casting) 
is one of the most common operations in SQL. In Flink 
1.15, the default behavior of a failing CAST has changed from returning a null to 
returning an error, which makes it more compliant with the SQL standard. The old 
casting behavior can still be used by calling the newly introduced TRY_CAST function
or restored via a configuration flag.

In addition, many bugs have been fixed and improvements made to the casting 
functionality, to ensure correct results. 


### JSON functions

JSON is one of the most popular data formats and SQL users increasingly need to build 
and read these data structures.  Multiple 
[JSON](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/dev/table/functions/systemfunctions/#json-functions)
functions have been added to Flink SQL 
according to the SQL 2016 standard. It allows users to inspect, create, and modify JSON 
strings using the Flink SQL dialect.


## Community enablement

Enabling people to build streaming data pipelines to solve their use cases is our goal. 
The community is well aware that a 
technology like Apache Flink is never used on its own and will always be part of a 
bigger architecture. Thus, it is important that Flink operates well in the cloud, 
connects seamlessly to other systems, and continues to support programming languages like Java and Python. 


### Cloud interoperability

There are users operating Flink deployments in cloud infrastructures from various 
cloud providers. There are also services that offer to manage Flink deployments for 
users on their platform. 

In Flink 1.15, a recoverable writer for Google Cloud Storage has 
been added. We also organized the connectors in the Flink ecosystem and put some focus 
on connectors for the AWS ecosystem (i.e. 
[KDS](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/kinesis/), 
[Firehose](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/firehose/)).


### The Elasticsearch sink

There was significant work on Flink’s overall connector ecosystem, but we want to highlight the 
[Elasticsearch sink](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/elasticsearch/) because it was implemented with 
the new connector interfaces, which offers asynchronous functionality coupled with end-to-end semantics. 
This sink will act as a template in the future.


### A Scala-free Flink

A detailed 
[blog post](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)  
already explains the ins and outs of why Scala users can now use the Flink 
Java API with any Scala version (including Scala 3). 

In the end, removing Scala is just part of a larger effort of cleaning up and updating
various technologies from the Flink ecosystem. 

Starting in Flink 1.14, we removed the Mesos integration, isolated Akka, deprecated the
DataSet Java API, and hid the Table API behind an abstraction. There’s already a lot of traction in the community towards these endeavors. 


## PyFlink

Before Flink 1.15, Python user-defined functions were executed in separate Python 
processes which caused additional serialization/deserialization and communication overhead. 
In scenarios in with large amounts of data, e.g. image processing,  etc, this overhead 
becomes non-negligible. Besides, since it involves inter-process 
communication, the processing latency is also non-negligible, which is unacceptable in 
scenarios for which latency is critical, e.g. quantitative transaction, etc. In Flink 
1.15, we have introduced a new execution mode named 'thread' mode, for which Python 
user-defined functions will be executed in the JVM as a thread instead of a separate 
Python process. Benchmarks have shown that throughput could be increased by 2x in 
common scenarios such as JSON processing. Processing latency is also decreased from 
several seconds to micro-seconds. It should be noted that since this is still the first 
release of 'thread' mode, it currently only supports Python ScalarFunction which is used 
in Python Table API & SQL. We're planning to extend it to other areas in which Python 
user-defined functions could be used in the next releases.


### Other 

Further work has been done on the 
[connector testing framework](https://github.com/PatrickRen/flink/tree/master/flink-test-utils-parent/flink-connector-testing). If you want to contribute a connector or improve on one, you should definitely have a 
look. 

Some long-awaited features have been added, including the 
[CSV format](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/formats/csv/) 
and the [small file compaction](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/docs/connectors/datastream/filesystem/#compaction) 
in the unified sink interface. 

The sink API has been upgraded 
to [version 2](https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/master/flink-core/src/main/java/org/apache/flink/api/connector/sink2/StatefulSink.java)
and we encourage every connector maintainer to upgrade to this version.


## Summary

Apache Flink is now easier to operate, made even more progress towards aligning stream and 
batch processing, became more accessible through improvements in the SQL components, 
and now integrates better with other technologies. 

It is also worth mentioning that 
the community has set up a new home for 
the [CDC connectors](https://ververica.github.io/flink-cdc-connectors/release-2.1/index.html), 
the [connector repository](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/Connectors) 
will be externalized 
([with the Elasticsearch sink as a first example](https://github.com/apache/flink-connector-elasticsearch/)), 
and there is now a 
[Kubernetes operator](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-kubernetes-operator-docs-main/) 
([announcement blogpost](https://flink.apache.org/news/2022/04/03/release-kubernetes-operator-0.1.0.html) 
maintained by the community.

Moving forward, the community will continue to focus on making Apache Flink a true 
unified stream and batch processor and work on better integrating Flink into the cloud-native 
ecosystem. 


## Upgrade Notes

While we aim to make upgrades as smooth as possible, some of the changes require users 
to adjust some parts of the program when upgrading to Apache Flink 1.15. Please take a 
look at the
[release notes](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.15/release-notes/flink-1.15/)
for a list of applicable adjustments and issues during 
upgrades. The one big thing worth mentioning when upgrading is the updated dependencies
without the Scala version.
[Get the details here.](https://flink.apache.org/2022/02/22/scala-free.html)


## List of Contributors

The Apache Flink community would like to thank each and every one of the contributors that have 
made this release possible:

Ada Wong, Ahmed Hamdy, Aitozi, Alexander Fedulov, Alexander Preuß, Alexander Trushev, Ali Bahadir Zeybek,
Anton Kalashnikov, Arvid Heise, Bernard Joseph Jean Bruno, Bo Cui, Brian Zhou, Camile, ChangLi, Chengkai Yang,
Chesnay Schepler, Daisy T, Danny Cranmer, David Anderson, David Moravek, David N Perkins, Dawid Wysakowicz,
Denis-Cosmin Nutiu, Dian Fu, Dong Lin, Eelis Kostiainen, Etienne Chauchot, Fabian Paul, Francesco Guardiani,
Gabor Somogyi, Galen Warren, Gao Yun, Gen Luo, GitHub, Gyula Fora, Hang Ruan, Hangxiang Yu, Honnix, Horace Lee,
Ingo Bürk, JIN FENG, Jack, Jane Chan, Jark Wu, JianZhangYang, Jiangjie (Becket) Qin, JianzhangYang, Jiayi Liao,
Jing, Jing Ge, Jing Zhang, Jingsong Lee, JingsongLi, Jinzhong Li, Joao Boto, Joey Lee, John Karp, Jon Gillham,
Jun Qin, Junfan Zhang, Juntao Hu, Kexin, Kexin Hui, Kirill Listopad, Konstantin Knauf, LB-Yu, Leonard Xu, Lijie Wang,
Liu Jiangang, Maciej Bryński, Marios Trivyzas, MartijnVisser, Mason Chen, Matthias Pohl, Michal Ciesielczyk, Mika,
Mika Naylor, Mrart, Mulavar, Nick Burkard, Nico Kruber, Nicolas Raga, Nicolaus Weidner, Niklas Semmler, Nikolay,
Nuno Afonso, Oleg Smirnov, Paul Lin, Paul Zhang, PengFei Li, Piotr Nowojski, Px, Qingsheng Ren, Robert Metzger,
Roc Marshal, Roman, Roman Khachatryan, Ruanshubin, Rudi Kershaw, Rui Li, Ryan Scudellari, Ryan Skraba,
Sebastian Mattheis, Sergey, Sergey Nuyanzin, Shen Zhu, Shengkai, Shuo Cheng, Sike Bai, SteNicholas, Steffen Hausmann,
Stephan Ewen, Tartarus0zm, Thesharing, Thomas Weise, Till Rohrmann, Timo Walther, Tony Wei, Victor Xu,
Wenhao Ji, X-czh, Xianxun Ye, Xin Yu, Xinbin Huang, Xintong Song, Xuannan, Yang Wang, Yangze Guo, Yao Zhang,
Yi Tang, Yibo Wen, Yuan Mei, Yuanhao Tian, Yubin Li, Yuepeng Pan, Yufan Sheng, Yufei Zhang, Yuhao Bi, Yun Gao,
Yun Tang, Yuval Itzchakov, Yuxin Tan, Zakelly, Zhu Zhu, Zichen Liu, Zongwen Li, atptour2017, baisike, bgeng777,
camilesing, chenxyz707, chenzihao, chuixue, dengziming, dijkwxyz, fanrui, fengli, fenyi, fornaix, gaurav726,
godfrey he, godfreyhe, gongzhongqiang, haochenhao, hapihu, hehuiyuan, hongshuboy, huangxingbo, huweihua, iyupeng,
jiaoqingbo, jinfeng, jxjgsylsg, kevin.cyj, kylewang, lbb, liliwei, liming.1018, lincoln lee, liufangqi, liujiangang,
liushouwei, liuyongvs, lixiaobao14, lmagic233, lovewin99, lujiefsi, luoyuxia, lz, mans2singh, martijnvisser, mayue.fight,
nanmu42, oogetyboogety, paul8263, pusheng.li01, qianchutao, realdengziqi, ruanhang1993, sammieliu, shammon, shihong90,
shitou, shouweikun, shouzuo1, shuo.cs, siavash119, simenliuxing, sjwiesman, slankka, slinkydeveloper, snailHumming,
snuyanzin, sujun, sujun1, syhily, tsreaper, txdong-sz, unknown, vahmed-hamdy, wangfeifan, wangpengcheng, wangyang0918,
wangzhiwu, wangzhuo, wgzhao, wsz94, xiangqiao123, xmarker, xuyang, xuyu, xuzifu666, yangjunhan, yangze.gyz, ysymi,
yuxia Luo, zhang chaoming, zhangchaoming, zhangjiaogg, zhangjingcun, zhangjun02, zhangmang, zlzhang0122, zoucao, zp,
zzccctv, 周平, 子扬, 李锐, 蒋龙, 龙三, 庄天翼
